# CLI

CLI stands for 'command line interface'.

``` txt
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ █
```

Let's break down its components.

| Component | Chapter |
|---|---|
| `{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~` | I Prompt string |
| `$` | II Prompt sign |
| `█` | III Command line |

## I Prompt string

The prompt string typically shows details such as the logged-in user, the machine name and the current working directory.

However, this can be customised. For example, enter the command `export PS1="Hello world"` and press enter.

::: terminal
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ export PS1="Hello world"
Hello world█
:::

::: note
After entering this command, it may appear as though execution has been interrupted, but this is not the case. The command line is now ready for new commands.
:::

The easiest way to undo the changes is to log out and log back in. Type in the command `exit` and press enter.

::: terminal
Hello worldexit
logout
:::

Then log back in.

### II Prompt sign

Although prompt sign is part of the prompt string, it is worth highlighting here.

The `$` sign indicates a user with standard permissions, while the `#` sign indicates a root user with elevated permissions.

::: beware
Using the root account for everyday operations is a bad idea. Ensure that your prompt sign always displays as "$".
:::

However, there's no need to worry about this for now. Root login is not an option in our training environment or in any other production environment that is managed by someone else.

## III Command line

The command line is where the magic happens! The text you enter is displayed and interpreted as a command when you press Enter.

Try this out by entering the command `export PS1='\u@\h \t:\w\$ '` and pressing Enter.

::: terminal
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ export PS1='\u@\h \t:\w\$ '
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}} 14:24:06:~$ █
:::

::: question
Can you tell what changed?
:::

If you'd like to, you could try building your own command-line prompt using this or other similar website: [bash-prompt-generator.org](https://bash-prompt-generator.org/).

Once you are happy with your prompt, you can continue with the chapter [Food for Thought of the introduction](01.2-food-for-thought.md).
