# Food for Thought: Navigation

As Linux is open source, there is no central authority enforcing a specific format for the operating system (OS).

This has its advantages and disadvantages. You have the freedom to make the operating system fit your purposes, but then again it can lead to compatibility issues with other Linux OSes regarding, for example, to the file and directory structure.

## Filesystem Hierarchy Standard

To address the historical differences in the way different Linux distributions organise files, a file system hierarchy standard has been defined. Although it is not compulsory to adhere to this standard, many distributions do so.

The current version of the standard is 3.0, which you can find here: [Filesystem Hierarchy Standard](https://refspecs.linuxfoundation.org/FHS_3.0/fhs/index.html).

Check it out if you want an overview of how and why the files exist in the hierarchy.

## Paths

The file's location within the hierarchy can be expressed using either an absolute or a relative path. Let's use the user's home directory (`__USERNAME__`) as an example. Executing command `pwd` would give us:

::: terminal
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~$ pwd
/home/__USERNAME__
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~$ █
:::

### Absolute path

An absolute path always starts from the root directory (`/`) and describes the location of the file. User's `__USERNAME__` home directory's absolute path is:

```txt
/home/__USERNAME__
```

For example, a file called `emptyfile` located in a user's `__USERNAME__` home directory would have the following absolute path:

```txt
/home/__USERNAME__/emptyfile
```

So, there are no exceptions: definition of an absolute path always starts from the root directory and specifies the full location within the hierarchy.

::: guidance
So, if the path starts with a `/` character, it always is an absolute path.
:::

### Relative path

A relative path describes a location in relation to the current location.

Again, let's continue with the `__USERNAME__` as an example who is located in their home directory, which contains a file called `emptyfile`. This is the same case as in the Paths chapter above.

The following would be valid in that location:

|Notation|Referred location|Description|
|-|-|-|
|`.`|`/home/__USERNAME__`|Current directory|
|`..`|`/home`| Parent directory|
|`emptyfile`|`/home/__USERNAME__/emptyfile`|Bare filename refers file in the current directory|
|`./emptyfile`|`/home/__USERNAME__/emptyfile`|Emphasise the file in current directory - In practice the same as above|
|`../emptyfile`|`/home/emptyfile`| File in the parent directory. <span class="text-red">Non-existing file</span> in our example|
|`/emptyfile`|`/emptyfile`| File in the root directory. <span class="text-red">Non-existing file</span> in our example|

::: question
Take a look at the last row in the table above. If you compare the notation and referred location - what can you say about the path's relativeness?
:::

### Path chaining

Relative paths can be 'chained'. To refer the parent directory's parent directory, one can type `../..` as in command `cd ../..` for example.

Using relative paths may sometimes be mandatory, for example in the source files of a code, but using absolute paths avoids confusion and possible errors.

It is important to understand the difference between these two types of reference.

## The many faces of the home directory 

As you may have noticed, the user's home directory is usually located in a `/home/username` path, where `username` is the ID of the logged-in user, such as `__USERNAME__`, `ubuntu` or `cbrown` etc.

There are a couple of other ways to address user's home directory:
- `~` indicates the home directory of the currently logged-in user. E.g. in command `cd ~`.
- The `$HOME` variable contains the home path of the user who is currently logged in. We will cover variables in more detail later.
- The command `cd` without any arguments will take the user to their home directory.

::: note
`~` is not a relative path, but an alias for the absolute path of the current user's home directory.
:::

Now you're ready to continue with the next chapter: [Files and directories](03-files-and-directories.md).
