# Links

For this chapter's topic, let's create a `playground` directory within your home directory. Then create two subdirectories labelled `one` and `two`.

::: terminal
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~$ cd
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~$ mkdir playground
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~$ cd playground
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ mkdir one two
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ ls
one  two
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ █
:::

Then, use the `dd` command to create a slightly larger file.

::: service
Copy and paste the command from here: `dd if=/dev/random of=bigfile bs=1M count=1`
Don't worry if you don't fully understand what it does - ultimately, a 1M file is created.
:::

::: terminal
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ dd if=/dev/random of=bigfile bs=1M count=1
1+0 records in
1+0 records out
1048576 bytes (1.0 MB, 1.0 MiB) copied, 0.00365744 s, 287 MB/s
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ ls
bigfile  one  two
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ █
:::

## inode

In the [previous chapter](03.1-file-properties.md), we used the `ls` command to observe file-related attributes. Now, let's try a different command called `stat`.

Type in the command `stat bigfile`.

::: terminal
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ stat bigfile 
  File: bigfile
  Size: 1048576         Blocks: 2048       IO Block: 4096   regular file
Device: 0,45    Inode: 537084      Links: 1
Access: (0664/-rw-rw-r--)  Uid: ( 1001/    __USERNAME__)   Gid: ( 1001/    __USERNAME__)
Access: 2020-04-18 17:18:27.221676627 +0000
Modify: 2020-04-18 17:18:27.224676657 +0000
Change: 2020-04-18 17:18:27.224676657 +0000
 Birth: 2020-04-18 17:16:22.221676627 +0000
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ █
:::

::: note 
You are already familiar with most of these and can deduce many of them.
:::

To better understand the links, pay attention to the `Inode` value in the `stat` command's output. In this example, it is `537084`. Each file in a filesystem has a unique one. More information is available at [inode](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/inode.7.htm)'s man pages.

## Hard link

In simple terms, the file name is a hard link to the file's inode number.

Type the command `ls -i1`. This will display the inode numbers and files' names (i.e. hard links).

::: terminal
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ ls -i1
537084 bigfile
524466 one
524480 two
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ █
:::

Let's create a hard link. Links are created using the `ln` command, and the link created by default is a hard link: `ln bigfile link-to-bigfile`.

::: question
What do you think the inode number of `link-to-bigfile` is?
:::

Check it with the command `ls -i1`. What if you list the files using the `ls -lh` command? Pay particular attention to the reported total size at the beginning of the output.

Then, enter the `du -h` command and compare the reported disk usage with that reported by the `ls -lh` command. Which do you think is correct?

::: terminal
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ ln bigfile link-to-bigfile
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ ls -i1
537084 bigfile
537084 link-to-bigfile
524466 one
524480 two
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ ls -lh
total 2.1M
-rw-rw-r-- 2 __USERNAME__ __USERNAME__ 1.0M Apr 18 17:18 bigfile
-rw-rw-r-- 2 __USERNAME__ __USERNAME__ 1.0M Apr 18 17:20 link-to-bigfile
drwxrwxr-x 2 __USERNAME__ __USERNAME__ 4.0K Apr 18 17:15 one
drwxrwxr-x 2 __USERNAME__ __USERNAME__ 4.0K Apr 18 17:15 two
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ du -h
4.0K    ./one
4.0K    ./two
1.1M    .
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ █
:::

::: beware
With hard links, it is not obvious whether an entry in the file system is a hard link or an another file.
:::

Finally, enter the `stat bigfile` command again and observe the number of `Links` reported by the command.

A file ceases to exist when the last hard link to it is deleted. Use the `rm link-to-bigfile` command to delete the other hard link, but leave the other to keep the file.

## Symbolic link

Let's create a symbolic link: `ln -s target s-link`. This command will create an entry called `s-link` that points to `target`. Then enter the command `file s-link`.

::: terminal
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ ln -s target s-link
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ file s-link
s-link: broken symbolic link to target
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ ls -l s-link
lrwxrwxrwx 1 __USERNAME__ __USERNAME__ 6 Apr 18 18:03 s-link -> target
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ █
:::

The `ls -l s-link` command shows an output and its first letter is `l`, indicating that it is a link, and that the permissions are `rwxrwxrwx`.

However, this does not grant unrestricted access to the target file, merely stating that the link itself is accessible to everyone. The actual permissions come from the `target` file.

So, what is the target file in this case?

::: note
Symbolic links can point to non-existent items.
:::

Next, let's create two more symbolic links:

`ln -s bigfile s-link-to-bigfile`
and
`ln -s s-link-to-bigfile target`

Observe the result using the `ls -l` command.

::: terminal
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ ln -s bigfile s-link-to-bigfile
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ ln -s s-link-to-bigfile target
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ ls -l
-rw-rw-r-- 1 __USERNAME__ __USERNAME__ 1048576 Apr 18 18:44 bigfile
drwxrwxr-x 2 __USERNAME__ __USERNAME__    4096 Apr 18 18:43 one
lrwxrwxrwx 1 __USERNAME__ __USERNAME__       6 Apr 18 18:44 s-link -> target
lrwxrwxrwx 1 __USERNAME__ __USERNAME__       7 Apr 18 18:44 s-link-to-bigfile -> bigfile
lrwxrwxrwx 1 __USERNAME__ __USERNAME__      17 Apr 18 18:45 target -> s-link-to-bigfile
drwxrwxr-x 2 __USERNAME__ __USERNAME__    4096 Apr 18 18:43 two
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ █
:::

::: service
So, this is the reference path between symbolic links and the actual file:
`s-link` ➡️ `target` ➡️ `s-link-to-bigfile` ➡️ `bigfile`
:::

In short, a symbolic link refers to the name and location of an entry, rather than to a file within the file system.

## Links in paths

Let's create both a hard link and a symbolic link:

`ln bigfile one/link-to-bigfile`
and
`ln -s ../bigfile two/s-link-to-bigfile`

Next, create a tree view of the contents with the `tree` command.

::: terminal
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ ln bigfile one/link-to-bigfile
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ ln -s ../bigfile two/s-link-to-bigfile
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ tree
.
├── bigfile
├── one
│&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;└── link-to-bigfile
└── two
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;└── s-link-to-bigfile -> ../bigfile

3 directories, 3 files
__USERNAME__@__HOSTNAME__:~/playground$ █
:::

::: service
Try using the `tree` command in the following format: `tree --inodes`. This prints the inode numbers of directory entries.
:::

Note that the symbolic link should form a path to the target from its own location - regardless of where the link is created. Consider the following set of commands to create the symbolic link:

1. `cd two`
2. `ln -s ../bigfile s-link-to-bigfile`

This is an alternative to the command used in the example and may help you to understand the syntax better.

Hard links refer to the inode number directly, so the location within the file structure is irrelevant.

Then continue to [the Food for Thought of the Files and directories](03.3-food-for-thought.md).
