# Food for Thought: Files and directories 

In Linux everything is a file - even directories. And if it's not a file, it's a process. And actually a process is a file in execution. Executable files are handled in more detail in the next chapter.

## Managing files

### Create

There are many ways to create a file. One method involves providing the file name as a parameter for a command, such as the `touch` command. Another method involves redirecting a [stream](04.2-standard-streams.md) into a new file using the `>` or `>>` operators. Yet another option is to save text from a text editor such as `nano`, `vim` or `emacs` into a file. And so forth.

A new file will also be created as an output of the compilation of a C source file by `gcc` or other tools.

When creating new files, the key point to note is that the file name itself tells us nothing about the file. Possible name extensions cannot be relied on, and file permissions define the file's features more than its name.

This goes for all files, of course.

### Modify

Modifying (including deletion) an existing file depends on the permissions of the file itself and its parent directory. The same applies to creating a new file: permission depends on the target directory's permissions.

::: tip
Renaming a file is actually moving (`mv`) the existing file into a new one with the new name.
:::

### Delete

In principle, Linux trusts that users know what they are doing. You'll face this in many interactions, such as when a file is created or deleted - successful execution produces no output. Users are only informed when an error occurs.

Deleting files is done without confirmation by default.

::: beware
There is no Trash or Bin where deleted files go first. If you `rm` or `rmdir` them - they are gone.
:::

## Different kind of files

The `file` command is even more useful than it seems at first glance. Try using it with a binary file:

::: terminal
__HOSTNAME__@__USERNAME__:~$ file /bin/ls
/bin/ls: ELF 64-bit LSB pie executable, x86-64, version 1 (SYSV), dynamically linked, interpreter /lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2, BuildID[sha1]=05dad2c279f7651722809fa75adba6bf9ab1c209, for GNU/Linux 3.2.0, stripped
__HOSTNAME__@__USERNAME__:~$ █
:::

If you're interested in finding out how it works, check out the man pages: [magic(4)](https://www.man7.org/linux/man-pages/man4/magic.4.html).

You will become more familiar with these features in future exercises, starting with the next chapter [Executables](04-executables.md).
