# Arguments

Arguments provide a way to input information and/or alter the behaviour of a command.

We have already experimented with this in previous examples, such as with the `ls` command and when working with files and directories.

Ensure that your location is set to your home directory.

## With system commands

Type in the following command: `mkdir -p dir/subdir`. Check the result using the `cd` and `ls` commands, or the `tree` command.

::: terminal
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ mkdir -p dir/subdir
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ tree dir
dir
└── subdir

2 directories, 0 files
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ █
:::

Arguments are usually categorised as options and mandatory arguments. Options start with a dash (e.g. in `-p`); if written in long format, they start with two dashes (`--parents`). A mandatory argument is one that the command cannot work without. For example, the `mkdir` command requires the name of the directory (`subdir`) to be created.

Now, with option `-p` we instructed the `mkdir` command to create possibly needed parent directories listed in the command's mandatory argument. As a result we get two directories with a one command.

Short options can be combined. For example, the command:

`ls --reverse --inode --almost-all --human-readable -1 -t`

can be written as:

`ls -riAh1t`

Both commands produce the same output.

::: tip
[Man pages](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man1/ls.1.html) are an excellent source of information on the different options and arguments that commands can have.
:::

## Within own scripts

Let's write the following script:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

echo "Command you executed is: $0 $@"
echo "cmd: $0"
echo "arg1: $1"
echo "arg2: $2"
```

Then make it executable and finally execute it with two arguments.

::: terminal
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ cat << EOF > scrp
&gt; #!/bin/bash
&gt;
&gt; echo "Command you executed is: $0 $@"
&gt; echo "cmd: $0"
&gt; echo "arg1: $1"
&gt; echo "arg2: $2"
&gt; EOF
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ chmod +x scrp
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ ./scrp Hello World
Command you executed is: ./scrp Hello World
cmd: ./scrp
arg1: Hello
arg2: World
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ █
:::

The arguments within your script are available as Bash variables. The variable `$0` contains the name of the script, and the others are available as positional parameters. All parameters can be accessed via the `$@` variable.

::: service
Variables are always present in a command-line environment. Try out the following commands: `echo $USER`, `echo $SHELL`, `echo $PATH` and `env`.
:::

## Program(s) compiled into binaries

The way arguments are handled in compiled binaries depends on the programming language used.

The following example is written in C:

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main(int argc, char* argv[]) {
    if (argc == 2) {
        printf("Command you executed is: %s %s %s\n", argv[0], argv[1], argv[2]);
        printf("cmd: %s\n", argv[0]);
        printf("arg1: %s\n", argv[1]);
        printf("arg2: %s\n", argv[2]);
    }
    return 0;
}
```

Without text editors, creating the binary example would look something like this:

::: terminal
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ cat << EOF > main.c
&gt; #include <stdio.h>
&gt; 
&gt; int main(int argc, char* argv[]) {
&gt;     if (argc == 3) {
&gt;         printf("Command you executed is: %s %s %s\n", argv[0], argv[1], argv[2]);
&gt;         printf("cmd: %s\n", argv[0]);
&gt;         printf("arg1: %s\n", argv[1]);
&gt;         printf("arg2: %s\n", argv[2]);
&gt;     }
&gt;     return 0;
&gt; }
&gt; EOF
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ gcc main.c -o bnry
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ ./bnry Hello World
Command you executed is: ./bnry Hello World
cmd: ./bnry
arg1: Hello
arg2: World
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ █
:::

::: note
As you notice, the longer the editable files come the more important it is to have a proper text editor. The chapter [Edit](06.2-edit.md) discusses editing files in more detail.
:::

Next, we will look at [standard streams](04.2-standard-streams.md).
