# Food for Thought: Executables

Where do the executable files come from?

## FHS

::: note
If you skipped the food for thought chapter on the navigation previously, now would be a good time to revisit it: [the Food for Thought of the Navigation](02.1-food-for-thought.md).
:::

The Filesystem Hierarchy Standard defines the default locations for system executables and the commands that should be available. It also makes recommendations about where executable files should not be stored. The following list contains some of the standard locations for executable files:

- [/bin](https://refspecs.linuxfoundation.org/FHS_3.0/fhs/ch03s04.html)
- [/sbin](https://refspecs.linuxfoundation.org/FHS_3.0/fhs/ch03s16.html)
- [/usr/bin](https://refspecs.linuxfoundation.org/FHS_3.0/fhs/ch04s04.html)
- [/usr/sbin](https://refspecs.linuxfoundation.org/FHS_3.0/fhs/ch04s10.html)
- [/opt](https://refspecs.linuxfoundation.org/FHS_3.0/fhs/ch03s13.html)

Many modern Linux distributions have centralised executables in directories under `/usr` and replaced the `/bin` and `/sbin` directories with links to the `/usr/bin` and `/usr/sbin` directories. The original locations are preserved for backwards compatibility.

## Variables

Variables are more of a thing of programming, but cannot be avoided when working with the Linux command line.

For example, they affect how Bash operates. You experimented with this out already in [1.1. CLI](01.1-cli.md) chapter with the `export` command.

Enter the command `env` without arguments to view the variables currently in effect for your Bash session.

::: terminal
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ env
SHELL=/bin/bash
PWD=/home/{{USERNAME}}
LOGNAME={{USERNAME}}
HOME=/home/{{USERNAME}}
LANG=C.UTF-8
TERM=xterm-256color
USER={{USERNAME}}
SHLVL=1
DEBUGINFOD_URLS=https://debuginfod.ubuntu.com 
HUSHLOGIN=FALSE
PATH=/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin:/usr/games:/usr/local/games:/snap/bin
MAIL=/var/mail/{{USERNAME}}
_=/usr/bin/env
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ █
:::

Individual variable values can be viewed using the `echo` command. For example `echo $PS1` will show you the current value of the bash prompt string.

### $PATH

As you may have noticed, you can simply type a command and the operating system will execute it. But how does the operating system find them?

The operating system searches executable files in directories defined by the `$PATH` variable. You can check your current `$PATH` variable using the command: `env | grep PATH`.

::: terminal
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ env | grep PATH
PATH=/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin:/usr/games:/usr/local/games:/snap/bin
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ █
:::

The `$PATH` variable contains a list of directories to be searched, each with its absolute path. These paths are separated by colons. While it is possible to add relative paths, this is not recommended for security reasons.

For example, adding the relative path `./` to the `$PATH` variable could cause a possibly malicious executable called `ls` in your current location to be executed instead of the system's own version.

If you modify the `$PATH` variable, always add new entries to the end of the list, keeping system directories at the beginning. Directories are checked from left to right, and when a match is found, the corresponding file is executed.

::: tip
You can use the `Tab ↹` key to autocomplete command names found in the directories listed in the `$PATH` variable. If there are multiple commands that start in the same way, pressing the `Tab ↹` key twice will generate a list of matching commands. The `Tab ↹` key also works for autocompleting path names.
:::

## DIY

Adding your own executable files to the operating system is easy. If you have administrative access, you can copy your files to directories in the `$PATH` variable. Alternatively, as a regular user, you can add your own directory (e.g. `~/bin`) to the `$PATH` variable.

This would mean that the operating system will also find your executable files without an absolute or relative path in front of the file name. The `Tab ↹` autocomplete feature also works with these commands.

## man pages

So, what do the system executables do? Where can information on how to use the commands be found?

These days, we have AI to help us. However, perhaps your computer is offline and you have no internet access. Or sometimes, consulting the manual for a command can give you better ideas for achieving your goal than an LLM would suggest.

The Man Pages project aims to compile a concise manual of all the system's installed commands. To view the manual for a command, simply type `man <cmd>` into your terminal. Press `q` to exit the manual.

Now:

a) Type in the command `man sl`.
b) Skim through the manual and exit with `q`.
c) Execute the command `sl`.

Great! We've covered a lot of ground. [The next chapter](05-midvoyage.md) will summarise everything that has been discussed so far.
