# View

Following examples focus on text files and highlight caveats with other formats.

## cat

The `cat` command is originally intended to be used for concatenating files, but it can also be used to view the contents of a single file.

By default, the command prints the file's contents to the terminal's standard output until it reaches the end of the file.

Try entering the command `cat /readme`.

::: terminal
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ cat /readme
This Linux environment has minimal resources and lacks appropriate
security measures. It is not designed to handle personal or classified
data and exists for educational purposes only.
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ █
:::

## head and tail

The `head` command outputs the first part of a file, while the `tail` command outputs the last part.

First, try running the `cat /etc/services` command. You'll notice that the file is so long that the `cat` command output is difficult to make sense of.

Then, run the `head /etc/services` command.

::: terminal
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ head /etc/services
# Network services, Internet style
#
# Updated from https://www.iana.org/assignments/service-names-port-numbers/service-names-port-numbers.xhtml .
#
# New ports will be added on request if they have been officially assigned
# by IANA and used in the real-world or are needed by a debian package.
# If you need a huge list of used numbers please install the nmap package.

tcpmux          1/tcp                           # TCP port service multiplexer
echo            7/tcp
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ █
:::

:::question
So, what is this file about?
:::

After executing the 'cat' command, the end of the file remains visible in the terminal. Sometimes, however, we just want to view the end of the file directly.

Enter the `tail /etc/services` command.

::: terminal
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ tail /etc/services
sgi-cad         17004/tcp                       # Cluster Admin daemon
binkp           24554/tcp                       # binkp fidonet protocol
asp             27374/tcp                       # Address Search Protocol
asp             27374/udp
csync2          30865/tcp                       # cluster synchronization tool
dircproxy       57000/tcp                       # Detachable IRC Proxy
tfido           60177/tcp                       # fidonet EMSI over telnet
fido            60179/tcp                       # fidonet EMSI over TCP

# Local services
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ █
:::

::: question
How many lines do these commands print by default? Check out the commands' man pages to find out how to change this.
:::

## less

Sometimes, you need to view the full contents of a file and cannot rely on the `head` or `tail` commands. However, the `cat` command prints the contents too quickly.

Enter `less`.

Type the following command: `less /etc/services`.

This will open the file in full-screen mode. You can then scroll through the file using the arrow keys. When you have finished, press `q` to exit.

## grep

::: tip
The `/etc/services` file contains the port numbers associated with specific network services. 
:::

`grep` is used to search for patterns in file(s). For example, if you want to know what port the SSH service uses, execute the command:

`grep ssh /etc/services`

Or if you want to know which service uses port 443:

`grep 443 /etc/services`

::: terminal
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ grep ssh /etc/services
ssh             22/tcp                          # SSH Remote Login Protocol
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ grep 443 /etc/services
https           443/tcp                         # http protocol over TLS/SSL
https           443/udp                         # HTTP/3
{{USERNAME}}@{{HOSTNAME}}:~$ █
:::

`grep` is a very versatile and powerful tool; by default, it prints all matches from the file along with their entire row.

## Viewing binary files

Before opening a file, recall that the `file` command can tell you whether it is a text or binary file. Opening a binary file with a text editor or `cat` will produce garbled output.

::: guidance
We'll use the `bnry` file created in the [Executables](04-executables.md#binary) chapter for the following exercises.
:::

### cat

::: beware
As mentioned, it is not recommended to use the `cat` command with binary files, as this may distort the command prompt. If this happens, type the `reset` command and press `Enter ↵`, even if the letters do not appear to be typed out correctly.
:::

Enter the command `cat bnry`.

### xxd

The `xxd` command displays the file as a hex dump, showing the hexadecimal values and their ASCII representations side by side.

Enter the command `xxd bnry`.

### strings

The `strings` command strikes a nice balance between displaying the contents of a file and preventing long prints and garbled output in your terminal. It only prints sequences of printable characters found in the binary file.

Enter the command `strings bnry`.

::: guidance
It is usually unnecessary to view the contents of a binary file. However, if you do so by accident, remember the `reset` command.
:::

Now, let's move on to [editing](06.2-edit.md) files.
